@c Copyright (c) 2015-2022, The matio contributors
@c Copyright (c) 2012-2014, Christopher C. Hulbert
@c All rights reserved.
@c
@c Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
@c modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
@c
@c 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
@c    list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
@c
@c 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
@c    this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
@c    and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
@c
@c THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
@c AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
@c IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
@c DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
@c FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
@c DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
@c SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
@c CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
@c OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
@c OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

@chapter Building matio
@section Quick Build Guide
The primary method for building the software is using @code{configure} followed
by @code{make}. After building, the testsuite can be executed to test the
software using @code{make check} (See @ref{Testsuite}. The software can be
installed using 'make install'. For example,

@verbatim
                $ tar zxf matio-X.Y.Z.tar.gz
                $ cd matio-X.Y.Z
                $ ./configure
                $ make
                $ make check
                $ make install
@end verbatim

@section Configure Options
@table @code
@item --enable-mat73=[yes|no]
This flag enables/disables the support for version 7.3 MAT files. The option
only makes sense if built with HDF5 as support for version 7.3 files will be
disabled if HDF5 is not available.
@item --enable-extended-sparse=yes
Enable extended sparse matrix data types not supported in MATLAB. MATLAB only
supports double-precision sparse data. With this flag, matio will read sparse
data with other types (i.e. single-precision and integer types).
@item --with-matlab=DIR
This option specifies the directory (DIR) with the @code{matlab} program. With
this option, the testsuite will check that the MAT files written by matio can be
read into MATLAB (see Section @ref{Testsuite} for more information about the
testsuite).
@item --with-zlib=DIR
This option specifies the prefix where zlib is installed.
@item --with-hdf5=DIR
This option specifies the prefix where the HDF5 software is installed.
@item --with-default-file-ver=[4|5|7.3]
This option sets the default MAT file version that will be used when writing.
The default file version is used by the Mat_Create macro and the
Mat_CreateVer function when MAT_FT_DEFAULT is used for the version argument.
@item --with-libdir-suffix=suffix
This option specifies a suffix to apply to library directories when installing
and looking for dependent libraries (i.e. HDF5 and zlib). For example, some
multi-arch Linux distributions install 64-bit libraries into lib64 and 32-bit
libraries into lib.
@end table

@section CMake build system
The CMake build system is supported as an alternative build system,
which usually consists of three steps for configuration, build and
installation, for example,

@verbatim
                $ tar zxf matio-X.Y.Z.tar.gz
                $ cd matio-X.Y.Z
                $ cmake .
                $ cmake --build .
                $ cmake --install .
@end verbatim

The following matio specific options for building with CMake are
available.
@table @code
@item MATIO_USE_CONAN:BOOL=OFF
This option enables the Conan package manager to resolve the library
dependencies.
@item MATIO_DEFAULT_FILE_VERSION:STRING=5
This option sets the default MAT file version (4,5,7.3) that
will be used when writing.
@item MATIO_EXTENDED_SPARSE:BOOL=ON
This option enables extended sparse matrix data types not
supported in MATLAB.
@item MATIO_MAT73:BOOL=ON
This flag enables the support for version 7.3 MAT files.
@item MATIO_PIC:BOOL=ON
This option enables position-independent code (PIC),
i.e., compilation with the @code{-fPIC} flag. It is ignored for
Visual Studio builds.
@item MATIO_SHARED:BOOL=ON
This option builds the matio library as shared object
(i.e., a dynamic link library on Windows).
@item MATIO_WITH_HDF5:BOOL=ON
This option enables CMake to check for availability of the
HDF5 library (see section 2.1.2 for information about HDF5).
@item MATIO_WITH_ZLIB:BOOL=ON
This option enables CMake to check for availability of the
zlib library (see section 2.1.1 for information about zlib).
@end table

To help CMake find the HDF5 libraries, set environment variable
HDF5_DIR to the @emph{cmake/hdf5} directory (containing
@emph{hdf5-config.cmake}) inside the HDF5 build or installation directory, or
call cmake with
@code{-DHDF5_DIR="dir/to/hdf5/cmake/hdf5}. Alternatively call CMake with
@code{-DCMAKE_PREFIX_PATH="dir/to/hdf5/cmake"}. See the HDF5 instructions
for more information. Using @emph{hdf5-config.cmake} is recommended over
using CMake's built-in @emph{FindHDF5}, especially for static builds.
CMake 3.10 or later is recommended.

@section Visual Studio
A visual studio solution is provided as visual_studio/matio.sln. The solution is
set up to build a DLL of the matio library (@emph{libmatio.dll}) and
@emph{matdump} tool in release mode and assumes HDF5 is available in the
directory specified by the HDF5_DIR environment variable. The build was tested
with the HDF5 visual studio pre-built Windows binaries including zlib.

@node Testsuite
@section Testsuite
A testsuite is available when building with the GNU autotools. To run the
testsuite, First configure and build matio. After building run @code{make check}
to run the testsuite. If matio was built without zlib, the compressed variable
tests will be skipped. If built without HDF5, the tests for version 7.3 MAT
files will be skipped. If the path to the MATLAB application was not specified
(@code{--with-matlab}), the write tests will fail if matio cannot read the file
and skip if matio can read the file. The write tests will pass if MATLAB is
available and can also read the file.

To report matio testsuite failures, compress the testsuite.log file in the test
sub-directory of the build directory. Upload the compressed log file along with
a bug report (see Section 1.4 for information on reporting bugs).
