@c Copyright (c) 2015-2026, The matio contributors
@c Copyright (c) 2011-2014, Christopher C. Hulbert
@c All rights reserved.
@c
@c SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause

@chapter Reading MATLAB Objects (MCOS)
@section Overview
Starting with MATLAB R2008a, MATLAB uses the MATLAB Class Object System (MCOS)
to serialise objects such as tables, strings, datetime arrays, and other
class-based types into MAT files.  When built with MCOS support enabled
(CMake option @code{MATIO_MCOS=ON}, which is the default), @emph{matio}
automatically decodes these objects when a variable is read with
@code{Mat_VarRead} or @code{Mat_VarReadNext}.

After reading, every MCOS object has @code{class_type} set to
@code{MAT_C_OBJECT} and @code{data_type} set to @code{MAT_T_STRUCT}.
The object's MATLAB class name (e.g.@: @code{"table"}, @code{"string"}) can
be obtained with @code{Mat_VarGetClassName}.  Object properties are exposed as
struct fields, accessible through the same API used for ordinary structures:
@code{Mat_VarGetStructFieldByName}, @code{Mat_VarGetStructFieldnames}, and
@code{Mat_VarGetNumberOfFields}.

@section Identifying an Object's Class
Use @code{Mat_VarGetClassName} to obtain the MATLAB class name of an object
variable.  The function returns @code{NULL} when MCOS support is disabled at
build time or when the variable is not an object.

@verbatim
matvar_t *matvar = Mat_VarRead(matfp, "T");
if ( matvar != NULL && matvar->class_type == MAT_C_OBJECT ) {
    const char *cls = Mat_VarGetClassName(matvar);
    if ( cls != NULL )
        printf("Class: %s\n", cls);
}
Mat_VarFree(matvar);
@end verbatim

@section Table and Timetable
MATLAB @code{table} and @code{timetable} objects are represented with the
following struct fields:

@table @code
@item nrows
A @code{MAT_C_DOUBLE} scalar containing the number of rows.
@item nvars
A @code{MAT_C_DOUBLE} scalar containing the number of variables (columns).
@item varnames
A @code{MAT_C_CELL} array of @code{MAT_C_CHAR} elements holding the column
header names.
@item data
A @code{MAT_C_CELL} array with one element per column.  Each element can be
a numeric array (@code{MAT_C_DOUBLE}, @code{MAT_C_SINGLE}), a character array
(@code{MAT_C_CHAR}), a cell array (@code{MAT_C_CELL}), or another MCOS object
(e.g.@: a @code{string} or @code{datetime} column).
@item props
A @code{MAT_C_STRUCT} containing table properties.  The @code{Description}
field, if present, is a @code{MAT_C_CHAR} string.
@end table

@noindent
Example: read a table and print its dimensions and column names.

@verbatim
matvar_t *T = Mat_VarRead(matfp, "T");
if ( T != NULL && T->class_type == MAT_C_OBJECT ) {
    matvar_t *f;
    int nrows = 0, nvars = 0;

    f = Mat_VarGetStructFieldByName(T, "nrows", 0);
    if ( f != NULL && f->class_type == MAT_C_DOUBLE && f->data != NULL )
        nrows = (int)*(double *)f->data;
    f = Mat_VarGetStructFieldByName(T, "nvars", 0);
    if ( f != NULL && f->class_type == MAT_C_DOUBLE && f->data != NULL )
        nvars = (int)*(double *)f->data;

    printf("Table: %d rows x %d columns\n", nrows, nvars);

    f = Mat_VarGetStructFieldByName(T, "varnames", 0);
    if ( f != NULL && f->class_type == MAT_C_CELL && f->data != NULL ) {
        matvar_t **cells = (matvar_t **)f->data;
        int i;
        for ( i = 0; i < nvars; i++ ) {
            if ( cells[i] != NULL && cells[i]->class_type == MAT_C_CHAR )
                printf("  Column %d: %s\n", i, (const char *)cells[i]->data);
        }
    }
}
Mat_VarFree(T);
@end verbatim

@section String
MATLAB @code{string} arrays are stored with the class name @code{"string"}.
The character data is held in a single struct field:

@table @code
@item any
A @code{MAT_C_UINT64} array containing packed UTF-16LE string data.
@end table

@noindent
The @code{any} field has the following internal layout (all values are
@code{uint64}):

@table @code
@item u64[0]@dots{}u64[1]
Header and dimension information.
@item u64[2]
Number of strings (@var{nstrs}).
@item u64[3]
Flags.
@item u64[4]@dots{}u64[4+@var{nstrs}-1]
Length of each string in UTF-16 code units.
@item u64[4+@var{nstrs}]@dots{}
Packed UTF-16LE character data (four code units per @code{uint64}).
@end table

@noindent
Example: extract the first string from a @code{string} scalar.

@verbatim
matvar_t *S = Mat_VarRead(matfp, "S");
if ( S != NULL && S->class_type == MAT_C_OBJECT ) {
    matvar_t *any = Mat_VarGetStructFieldByName(S, "any", 0);
    if ( any != NULL && any->class_type == MAT_C_UINT64 && any->data != NULL ) {
        const mat_uint64_t *u64 = (const mat_uint64_t *)any->data;
        size_t nstrs = (size_t)u64[2];
        if ( nstrs > 0 ) {
            size_t header_len = 4 + nstrs;
            size_t slen = (size_t)u64[4]; /* length of first string */
            const unsigned char *bytes =
                (const unsigned char *)&u64[header_len];
            size_t j;
            for ( j = 0; j < slen; j++ ) {
                mat_uint16_t ch = (mat_uint16_t)(bytes[j * 2] |
                    ((mat_uint16_t)bytes[j * 2 + 1] << 8));
                if ( ch >= 32 && ch < 127 )
                    putchar((char)ch);
            }
            putchar('\n');
        }
    }
}
Mat_VarFree(S);
@end verbatim

@section Datetime
MATLAB @code{datetime} arrays are stored with the class name @code{"datetime"}.
The timestamp data is held in a struct field:

@table @code
@item data
A @code{MAT_C_DOUBLE} array.  Each element is a timestamp expressed as
milliseconds since the Unix epoch (1970-01-01 00:00:00 UTC).
@end table

@noindent
Example: read a datetime array and convert the first element.

@verbatim
matvar_t *D = Mat_VarRead(matfp, "D");
if ( D != NULL && D->class_type == MAT_C_OBJECT ) {
    matvar_t *data_f = Mat_VarGetStructFieldByName(D, "data", 0);
    if ( data_f != NULL && data_f->class_type == MAT_C_DOUBLE &&
         data_f->data != NULL ) {
        double ms = *(const double *)data_f->data;
        time_t t = (time_t)(ms / 1000.0);
        printf("First timestamp: %s", ctime(&t));
    }
}
Mat_VarFree(D);
@end verbatim

@section Duration and Calendar Duration
MATLAB @code{duration} and @code{calendarDuration} arrays use the class names
@code{"duration"} and @code{"calendarDuration"} respectively.  Both store
their data in the same struct field:

@table @code
@item millis
A @code{MAT_C_DOUBLE} array.  Each element is a duration expressed in
milliseconds.
@end table

@noindent
Example: read a duration array.

@verbatim
matvar_t *dur = Mat_VarRead(matfp, "dur");
if ( dur != NULL && dur->class_type == MAT_C_OBJECT ) {
    matvar_t *millis = Mat_VarGetStructFieldByName(dur, "millis", 0);
    if ( millis != NULL && millis->class_type == MAT_C_DOUBLE &&
         millis->data != NULL ) {
        const double *d = (const double *)millis->data;
        size_t n = 1;
        int r;
        for ( r = 0; r < millis->rank; r++ )
            n *= millis->dims[r];
        printf("Duration[0] = %g ms\n", d[0]);
    }
}
Mat_VarFree(dur);
@end verbatim

@section Categorical
MATLAB @code{categorical} arrays use the class name @code{"categorical"} and
expose two struct fields:

@table @code
@item categoryNames
A @code{MAT_C_CELL} array of @code{MAT_C_CHAR} elements holding the category
labels.
@item codes
A @code{MAT_C_UINT8} array (or @code{MAT_C_UINT16} for large category sets).
Each element is a 1-based index into @code{categoryNames}.  A value of 0
indicates an undefined category.
@end table

@noindent
Example: print categorical values.

@verbatim
matvar_t *C = Mat_VarRead(matfp, "C");
if ( C != NULL && C->class_type == MAT_C_OBJECT ) {
    matvar_t *names = Mat_VarGetStructFieldByName(C, "categoryNames", 0);
    matvar_t *codes = Mat_VarGetStructFieldByName(C, "codes", 0);
    if ( names != NULL && names->class_type == MAT_C_CELL &&
         codes != NULL && codes->data != NULL ) {
        matvar_t **cells = (matvar_t **)names->data;
        size_t ncats = names->nbytes / names->data_size;
        size_t i, n = 1;
        int r;
        for ( r = 0; r < codes->rank; r++ )
            n *= codes->dims[r];
        for ( i = 0; i < n; i++ ) {
            mat_uint8_t code = ((mat_uint8_t *)codes->data)[i];
            if ( code > 0 && code <= ncats )
                printf("%s\n", (const char *)cells[code - 1]->data);
            else
                printf("<undefined>\n");
        }
    }
}
Mat_VarFree(C);
@end verbatim

@section containers.Map
MATLAB @code{containers.Map} objects use the class name @code{"Map"} and store
their contents in a nested struct:

@table @code
@item serialization
A @code{MAT_C_STRUCT} containing the Map's key-value data.
@item serialization.keys
A @code{MAT_C_CELL} array of key values.
@item serialization.values
A @code{MAT_C_CELL} array of corresponding values.
@item serialization.keyType
A @code{MAT_C_CHAR} string naming the key type (e.g.@: @code{"char"},
@code{"double"}).
@item serialization.valueType
A @code{MAT_C_CHAR} string naming the value type.
@end table

@noindent
An empty map may not have the @code{serialization} field.

@noindent
Example: iterate over a Map's entries.

@verbatim
matvar_t *M = Mat_VarRead(matfp, "M");
if ( M != NULL && M->class_type == MAT_C_OBJECT ) {
    matvar_t *ser = Mat_VarGetStructFieldByName(M, "serialization", 0);
    if ( ser != NULL && ser->class_type == MAT_C_STRUCT ) {
        matvar_t *keys = Mat_VarGetStructFieldByName(ser, "keys", 0);
        matvar_t *values = Mat_VarGetStructFieldByName(ser, "values", 0);
        if ( keys != NULL && keys->class_type == MAT_C_CELL &&
             values != NULL && values->class_type == MAT_C_CELL ) {
            matvar_t **kcells = (matvar_t **)keys->data;
            matvar_t **vcells = (matvar_t **)values->data;
            size_t n = keys->nbytes / keys->data_size;
            size_t i;
            for ( i = 0; i < n; i++ ) {
                printf("Key: ");
                Mat_VarPrint(kcells[i], 0);
                printf("Value: ");
                Mat_VarPrint(vcells[i], 0);
            }
        }
    }
}
Mat_VarFree(M);
@end verbatim

@section Dictionary
MATLAB @code{dictionary} objects (R2022b and later) use the class name
@code{"dictionary"} and store their data in a nested struct:

@table @code
@item data
A @code{MAT_C_STRUCT} containing the dictionary contents.
@item data.Key
The key array.  Can be @code{MAT_C_CELL}, @code{MAT_C_DOUBLE}, or
@code{MAT_C_OBJECT} (e.g.@: for string keys).
@item data.Value
The value array.  Same possible types as @code{Key}.
@item data.Unconfigured
A @code{MAT_C_UINT8} scalar.  Non-zero when the dictionary was created without
specifying key and value types.
@end table

@section Other Object Types
Any MCOS class that matio does not handle specially (e.g.@:
@code{scatteredInterpolant}) is still decoded into a @code{MAT_C_OBJECT} with
whatever properties MATLAB serialised.  The generic struct field API can be used
to enumerate and access all fields:

@verbatim
int nfields = Mat_VarGetNumberOfFields(matvar);
char *const *fieldnames = Mat_VarGetStructFieldnames(matvar);
int i;
for ( i = 0; i < nfields; i++ ) {
    matvar_t *fld = Mat_VarGetStructFieldByName(matvar, fieldnames[i], 0);
    printf("Field: %s\n", fieldnames[i]);
    if ( fld != NULL )
        Mat_VarPrint(fld, 0);
}
@end verbatim
